Hi guys and welcome back.
In this video, we're going to learn
how to get the remainder of a division.
And that is going to allow us
to find out whether a number is odd or even.
And that itself has a number of uses in programming.
So let's get started.
I'm going to create a variable called integer_division
and make it equal to 13 divide divide five.
Remember that when we do integer division,
what we're doing is we are performing normal division,
so 13 divided by five, which gives us 2.6,
and then we're dropping everything
after the decimal place.
So that means we end up with two
because five goes into 13 twice.
If we print this out,
then you'll see that the print output is two.
Now if we wanted to get the remainder of the division,
which is three,
then Python gives us a nice way of doing that
with the modulus operator.
Let's get the remainder of this division
by doing 13 modulus five.
Notice that this modulus operator is the percent symbol.
When you do 13 modulus five,
Python will divide and then calculate what is left over.
So if we print the remainder,
then you'll see that the output would be first two,
and then three.
There you have it.
So again, if we wanna find out
whether a number is odd or even,
we can use the modulus operator.
Have a look at these numbers
and see if you spot a pattern.
We've got the number 10, 14, six, and 340,
all of them divided by two.
What would the remainder of this division be
if we evaluate it?
And for all of these numbers, which are all even,
the remainder of division by two is always zero.
That is what characterises even numbers as even,
that when they're divided by two, there is no remainder.
Similarly, if you get some odd numbers,
you'll see that the pattern is inverted in a way,
and you get 11 divided by two,
27 divided by two, and three divided by two,
and the remainder in all of these cases is always one.
For example, for 11 divided by two,
two goes into 11 five times, you get 10.
And then 11 minus 10 gives you a remainder of one.
So again, for every even number,
the remainder when divided by two is always zero.
And for every odd number,
the remainder when divided by two is always one.
So we can use this knowledge to check
whether any arbitrary number is odd or even.
Let's say we've got an arbitrary number, 37.
This could be the user's age,
or it could be the row number
in a table or something like that.
And then we wanna calculate whether it is odd or even.
What we have to do is we have to get the modulus operator
and calculate the remainder of this number
when divided by two.
So we will say remainder equal x percent two.
Now notice that we've got this variable remainder,
which we used earlier on.
That's totally fine, this is just the variable name.
You can call it whatever you want,
you can even reuse a previous variable name,
and that's fine.
What we've done here is we've got the value x modulus two,
which is the remainder of the division,
and we've said that the remainder variable
that we created earlier is now a name for this value.
So that just reassigns that variable.
If we print it out,
you'll see that the output should be one.
But before running, I'm just going to delete this code here.
And now let's run this.
You see that we get one back,
which tells us this number here is odd.
Think about this,
have you ever seen a table online
where each row has a different colour?
So for example, the first row is grey,
second one's white, third one's grey,
the fourth one's white.
So you've got this sort of pattern.
This is a perfect example of where the remainder,
or being able to calculate
whether a number is odd or even comes into play.
They are probably using this to only target the even rows
and colour them in a grey background.
Throughout the course, we may also encounter other instances
where this can be useful.
But that's it for this video,
thank you for joining me
and I'll see you in the next one.